in this video we are going to learn how to
delete a node from a binary search tree
We have to consider three cases while we performed deletion
in a binary search tree
Here is an example of a BST and the first
case is if the node to be deleted is a
leaf node
And suppose we have to delete 300 which is a
leaf node here
There are no complexities to delete a leaf node
so simply deleted
The second case is when we have to delete a
node with a single child
Then we can delete that node and it's child takes
its position
That is if the node to be deleted has only
a right child delete
That node and it's right Child takes its position
For example let us delete the node 200
It has only a right child which is 300
So Delete 200 it's Child 300 takes 200 hundreds Position
Similarly if the node to be deleted has had left
child similarly if the node to be deleted has only a left
child delete the node and it's left
Child takes that position
For example let us delete 200 here it has only
one child 150 which is it's left child so to delete
We can delete it and 150 takes its position
like this
So that was the second case
The first case is node with no Children
The second case is node with a single child
And next is the third case which is obviously a
node with two Children
So in that case we have to find the
inorder successor and replace the node to be deleted with
it
see an example node 200
It has both left child and right child
So this is our third case
And what is an inorder successer it will
be the node that comes immediately after this particular node
in the inorder Traversal
We can easily find it because it will be the
minimum value in its right sub tree
And we know the minimum value of any sub tree
of binary search tree will be
It's left most node
We have learned that so to delete 200
We have to delete 200 it's in order
Successor takes that position and which is the inorder
successor of 200
It will be the minimum value in right sub tree
which is 250 here
So delete 200 250 takes its position
So now let us see how to implement it in
Java
So we have this function
Remove node
To do that we will pass the root of the
tree and value to be deleted and it returns the
tree after deletion
So we have public node removed
node of node root coma int val so let us Divide this
deletion process into four steps
First check if the tree is empty
If not find the node to be deleted
Once the node to be deleted is found find the
case applicable
That is we learnt three cases node with no child
single child and two Children
Once the case is identified take appropriate action
This is what we are going to do
So here let us delete the node ten
So first check
If the tree is empty for that we have if
root equal to null and if it is written null
But here it is not
So what is the next step Find a node to
be deleted here
Val equal to 10 so we have to find the
node with the data 10
Then only we can delete it
And we know elements list than root will be to
the left side and larger than root will be to
the right side
And here the larger that we're using is we will
check
If this node is less than the root then we
will check in the left sub tree only so called
the function remove
node for left sub tree only
And if node is greater than root we will check
in the right sub tree only so call the function
Remove node for right sub tree if it is not
less than or grater than root then the node to
be deleted is the root so we can proceed with
our deletion
So let's see how it works
We have Val equal to 10 so check if root
key is less than val 100 is not less than
val
So check if root key is greater than val 100 is
greater than 10 so the value is less than the root
So we only need to check in the left sub tree
so call remove node bypassing the left sub tree So
how do you pass a sub tree To pass a
tree you can pass its root
A root has links to all the nodes
Similarly to pass a sub tree you can pass the
root of it sub tree
We have root left equal to remove node of root
left comma val
So if 10 is present in this left sub tree
it will be deleted and that sub tree will be
returned to this functions and it will be updated here
so remove node is called again bypassing
node 50 and value 10 So first check if the
tree is empty but it is not so
check if root key is Less than val but 50 is
not less than ten so check
If root Key is greater than val and 50 is
greater than 10 so again 10 can be present in
the left
Subtree only so repeat the step
Call remove node
Bypassing the left sub tree and the value so remove
node is called again bypassing the node ten and the
value 10
Now again check if the tree is empty but it is
not so
check if root key is less than val but 10
is not less than 10
So next check if root key is greater than val and
10 is not greater than 10 too So as we
discussed ten is not less than root and ten is not greater
than root 10 must be the root here so else
part will work here
That is we found the node to be deleted which
is the root of this sub tree
So we performed two steps checking if the tree is empty
and if not finding the node to be deleted
Now what is the third step It is identifying the
deletion case so first check
If it is a node with no Children that is
if it is a leaf node and if it is
a leaf node then it's left and right will be
null so check If root left equal to null and
root right equal to null And here it is So
the third step is done The case is identified now what
is the final step Take appropriate actions so we know
if it is a leaf node we can simply delete
it So return null And please understand that this is
not the root of the whole tree but of the
sub tree we passed
This function is called for the third time here and
the root we are referring
Here is the node with value 10
So the root of this sub tree is deleted
So written null to the calling function
And finally root of the original tree will be returned
to the function called Remove
node first So that is how we can delete a
leaf node
Now let us delete another node
Let it be the node with value 300 so val equal
to 300
So as we discussed first check if the tree is
empty but it is not so
check If root key is less than val and we have
100 less than 300 so 300 can be present in
the right subtree only
So call remove
node bypassing
It's right sub tree and the value
So remove node is called again by passing Node
200 which is the root of right sub tree and
the value 300
Now again check if the tree is empty
But it is not the check
If root key is less than val and 200 is
less than 300
So this is true
So 300 can be present in the right sub tree
only
So again call remove node bypassing the right sub tree
and the value to be deleted
So call removed
node
Bypassing it's right sub tree and the value
So remove node is called again by Passing the node 300 which
is the root of right sub tree and the value
Now again check If the tree is empty but it is
not 300 is not less than the root and 300
is not greater than the root
So 300 must be the root here So we have
found the node to be deleted and the next step
is to identify the deletion case
So first check if it is a leaf node and
we have if root left equal to null and root right
equal to null
But it fails since root left is not equal to
null so
The statement inside will be skipped now check
If it is an only right child case so Check
If root left equal to null and it is not true
here now check If it is only left child
case so check if root right equal to null and
it is true here so both left and right
Is not equal to null but only right equal to
null
So what is this It is a only left child
case
So what should we do We have to delete that
node and it's child should take that position
So return left child which will be stored as root
right in the calling function and finally root of the
original tree will be returned to the function called Remove
node first
So that is how a single child node can be
deleted
Now let us delete another node that it be 200
so as we discussed first we need to check if
the tree is empty but it is not so
check
If root key is less than val 100 is less
than 200 so 200 can be present in the right
subtree only
So call remove
node
Bypassing
It's right subtree and the value so removed node is
called again by passing Node
200 which is the root of right subtree and
the Value 200 now again check if the tree is empty
But it is not two hundred is not less than root
and 200 is not greater than root So 200 must
be the root node here
So we have found the node to be deleted
Next we need to identify the deletion case
So first check If it is a leaf node
So we have if root left equal to null and
root right equal to null
But it is not so check If it is only
right child case so check If root left equal to
null but it fails here So next check If it
is only left child case So check if root right
equal to null But it also fails here So it
is not a leaf node case not single left child
case and not single right child case So it must
be both left and right Child case that is the
two Children case
So in this case what should we do We need
to find the inorder successor of 200 That is
the minimum value in write subtree of 200 so let us
call a function Get right Min bypassing its right
subtree that is node 300 So right int right min
equal to get right min of root right So what we
have to do in this function is we have to
traverse through the left child till we get a null
So create a temp pointing to root and use a
while loop while temp left not equal to null and
move temp to its left child
So 1st temp points to 300 and now we have
temp left equal to 250
which is not equal to null so go inside
and move temp to its left child
So temp equal to 250 now again check
If temp left not equal to null but it is
here
So control comes out of the while loop and return
temp key which will be the inorder successor and
it will be stored in integer variable
Right min here
So copy this inorder successor to node to
be deleted which is root here
So we have root key equal to right min
So 250 is stored here
Now we have to delete the original node with
250 a call Remove node function bypassing right sub tree
root right and inorder
Successor value 250 now again check if tree is empty
but it is not so check If root key is
greater than val and we have 300 greater than
So call remove node function bypassing the left sub tree
and the value 250
And here first check if tree is empty
But it is not 250 is not less than root
and not even greater than root
So it must be the root here
So we have found the node to be deleted
So identified the deletion case
So first check if it is a leaf node and
we have if root left equal to null and root
right equal to null and it is true here
So this is a Leaf node case so simply deleted
So written null and finally the root will be returned
So that is how deletion can be performed in a
binary search tree.